It was first mentioned in the story of the Seljuk vizier Nizam al-Mulk (XI c.), The conquest of infidel Turks Balasagun shortly before 943 capturing Balasagun, Turks (Karakhanids) accepted Islam. Balasagun was the capital of one of the portions, Karakhanid state. X in the end. Balasagun, according to al-Maqdisi, was a "great location, abundant blessings." Mahmud Kashgar leads other names of the city: Coos Coos Ulush and Urdu. He also reported that residents Balasagun speak Sogd and Turkic, and that "sugdag -. People living in Balasagun They are from Sogd, but look like Turks and adopted their customs." About 11ZO of Balasagun won Karakitaj which in 1210 were defeated by Muhammad Khwarizmshah than benefited residents Balasagun: they refused to let the city defeated the army of Kara-Khitai. However, after the siege of the city was stormed and looted. According to sources, the number of dead was 47 thousand people. In 1218 Balasagun was occupied by the Mongols without a fight and got the name "Gobalyk" - "good city". When the Mongols written sources of Balasagun not mention, no news of him, and in the descriptions of Timur's campaigns in Mogolistan. Author geographical writings "Bahr al-Asrar" ( "Sea of ​​Secrets"), who lived in the XVII century. Mahmud ibn Vali wrote: "Balasagun - from cities Turkestanzamina known (called) Mogolistan, before the Mongol invasion was a purely Muslim population from it came many scientists Mustaufi says.." Balasagun - a country of vast and natural; from the sixth - seventh climates. Its climate is very cold. "In some chronicles reported that" the width of its fortress wall was two and a half (gyaza). Balasagun had forty-two hundred Catholic and everyday mosques. Twenty khanaka ten madrasas ... "After the invasion of the Mongols as long as the customs of the Mongols did not hurt him, he was well-maintained and flowering. And from that time until now it is in a devastated state and abandoned. A certain traveler kashgarets during compiling this book in Balkh said: "One day the governor of Kashgar invaded Mogolistan to condemn and punish the Kalmyks. Two months later, following the direction from the east to the north, they reached a certain place, where out of the sand for four to five cumin were roofs of tall buildings: minarets, palaces, arches, madrassas, and signs them were visible from a distance of four farsangs . Not far from the locality, we caught up with the Kalmyks, the battle took place between us. They seized from among the infidels many prisoners and return, when they came to the place where before we saw the remains of buildings from the prisoners asked the name of this area. They said: "We know that here at last was a town called Balasagun" ... In short, this city in the past was one of the best cities of the province. In general, according to the researchers, Balasagun known already in the middle of the VIII century. In the writings of medieval geographers among the villages called Semirechye "Beklig" ( "Beklelig"), which in Sughd sounded like "Semekna". Possessor of villages covering bore the title Badan-Sangu or Turkic Yin-tegin; he had 3,000 soldiers, in addition, the city fielded 7,000 warriors. The village Beklig (Beklelig or Semekna) corresponds Balasaguni, and here's why. Referring to the value of "Beklig", comparing it with the word "salmon", which is used in the Turkic languages ​​within the meaning of the "city". Analysis of the word "salmon" given SP Tolstov. "Balasagun", according to SP Tolstov as Mongolian form "Balgasun" means "city", and the one and the other comes from the Turkic word "salmon" - city. Another possible interpretation of the toponym "Balasagun" - a word consisting of two - "Ball" and "Sagun," where the "ball" - a truncated form of "salmon-beklig" and "Sagun" - military and administrative title, distributed among Turkish nobility, and other peoples of Central Asia. Of particular importance is the fact that the ruler of the city held the title Bekliga Badan-Sangu, in which "Badan" is a name known among the Sogdian and Persian aristocracy. Scientist SGKlyashtorny convincingly showed that the title "sengun" ( "Sangu") was hereditary, as in 731 cities Soghdians Semirechye Embassy, ​​came to Kul-Tegin funeral, led Neck sengun and Ogul-Tarhan. The first was the forerunner of Badan-Sangu. The conclusion about the identity and Bekliga Balasagun. The first name means "just city", the second is interpreted as "city sengun". In Sughd "Beklig" called "Semekna" and VV Bartold considered him Sogdian colony. In favor of this view also shows the analysis of 52-53 lines of runic inscriptions in honor of Kul-Tegin (VIII cent.), Which refers to the Embassy of the Sogdian cities, one of whose leaders was sengun Neck, and he apparently was the ruler is Bekliga - Semekny - Balasagun. Sughd population Balasagun maintained even in the XI century, and not coincidentally, Mahmud Kashgar wrote that. "Sugdak - people living in Balasagun". This is another proof in favor of the identity of the Sogdian city Bekliga - Semekny Balasagun and cities, where lived the Sogdians. Balasagun identified with the mound Burana, which is located near Tokmok in Kyrgyzstan. It explores the Kyrgyz archeologists. There are open Muslim mausoleums, bath, which confirms, together with the surviving minaret mosque X-XII centuries. metropolitan role was situated on the site of the city Balasagun.