Dated this monument of history and culture VI - the beginning of XIII century. Archaeological research settlement started in the late XIX century, but now the excavations conducted here. The complex of multi-sites located in and around the village of Kulan Ryskulov district. According to the archives, the first time this village is mentioned in the written sources of VII century Chinese pilgrim Xuan Zang. In VII - X centuries of Arabian travelers wrote kulan, which characterized the city, located on the Great Silk Road. According to them, Kulan was 14 farsakhs (measure of length from six to nine kilometers) west of the city of Taraz. Arab geographer al-Maksudi leave the following information: "Kulan - fortified town mosque in it (Medina), lies on the big road Taraz". With kulan associated with a number of famous historical events. Thus, in the year 740 here was killed last Western Turkic Hagan Ashin Syn. In the 840 year to reach Kulan Arab forces. - Archaeological studies have revealed three cultural settlement layers: VII - VIII century, IX - X and XI - XIII century. The topography of the object can be traced shahristan, the citadel and the traces of unfortified rabad on the east side, - tells us a guide of the museum district Bauyrzhan Tolybaev. - Currently, the excavations carried out in the palace complex of the former rabad. Scientists from the Institute of Archaeology named after Alcaeus Margulan work here. In this place it was found a bronze cauldron, which dates from the VII - VIII centuries. It is stored in our museum, as well as many other finds from the ancient city of Kulan, for example, hums for storing wine and grain, jugs. By the way, here we found a workshop for the processing of grapes, which dates from the IX century. - The palace complex settlement Kulan is located on an area of ​​2246 square meters. With his excavations produced important material that characterizes the architecture and construction technology of the time - says a leading researcher at the Institute Arnabay Nurzhanov. - On the subject of building four horizon. The main raw material for the construction of buildings served loess - non-baked clay. He walked to manufacture pakhsa (bolshemernyh adobe blocks) and brick, serves as a solution, was used to plaster walls and wash floors, and was used as a waterproofing roofing material. In the early Middle Ages burnt bricks were used for the pavement of individual sections of the sexes, and in the XI - XII centuries have already erected wall of a building in the citadel. The scientist said that due to the strength of loess soil buildings erected without a foundation in the cleared of turf and leveled areas (stylobate). They are usually arranged in the uplands. Later, from the IX century, the base of the walls were the ruins of early medieval structures. In the XI - XII centuries in the building of the citadel walls of baked bricks were delivered to a number of flat stones. - Exterior wall construction rather massive - a width of two and a half to three meters, and the interior - up to one meter, - says Arnabay Nurzhanov. - In general, similar architectural solutions and construction techniques were common in Central Asia, but in the wild asses revealed notable features of identity (in the planning and architectural design volumetric structures). It highlights the mound as the site of the original local architectural style. four terracotta head, repulsed from torsos - In excavations sensational finds were discovered. - Fragments of the statues can be dated IX century, of course, if they have not been moved from the premises underlying cultural layers dating back to VII - III centuries - reflects Arnabay Nurzhanov. - The composition of the sculptor tour, apparently represented the dynastic group portrait, which has established itself in Central Asia in the first century AD. Persons - with mixed Caucasoid features and Turkic type. This is most likely the main members of a local dynasty. This is evidenced by the crown, which was crowned with the head of characters, as well as quiet, stately expression on their faces, full of the usual dignity. Overview of portrait images of the peoples of Central Asia, shows that direct analogues sculpted head of the excavation, "Mr. Meadow" no. On the eve of our visit to the settlement student of the Kazakh National Pedagogical University Nurjan Ibragimov, busy on the excavation, he found the ring, covered with a green patina. By design, female. Arnabay Nurzhanov said that most likely it was manufactured in the IX - X centuries. We need it more clear and perform an examination. Found in the castle - it is not the only thing you can tell in connection with admission of the archaeological monument on the UNESCO list. Unfortunately, the object is not protected today, he is not fenced and is not preserved after a season of excavation. Therefore, its safety is questionable. And yet it is the only in Kazakhstan, the palace complex of this magnitude. Elena Efimova photo of the author, and Arnab Nurzhanova Bauyrzhan TOLYBAEVA